---
layout: post
title:  "Paying Morality with Money"
date:   2022-05-22 10:48:50 +0530
categories: morality, philosophy, what-if
---

Today I wish to toy with an idea which has been in my mind for a while now, it was introduced to me when I met some one at the monthly Space Sparkers meeting (something I will be talking about soon) and he was talking about how he is working on this new startup idea of his which takes the idea of "Time is Money" quite literally. The idea was to give people rewards for helping to volunteer in tasks that give back to soceity for example plantation drives. The time you spend helping other will be rewarded by giving you special rewards such as discounts on movie tickets or some sort of coupon or a voucher to spend at your favourite restaurant. 

This got me thinking about the actual morality of rewarding someones conscience with money. And while it can be said that the rewards they are receiving is not plain money if we think about it rather than receiving money the coupons that are being given save money which means that in the aggregate view the equation remains the same. Nevertheless what matters is weather doing something like this makes sense and will it be exploited into oblivion. When I asked about the funding there were 2 answers one was where the companies could fund these activities from the CSR money they will be spending and the other was where the government could come in and pay for these coupons and vouchers in return for the volunteering work done by the people. Both these ideas seem resonable enough but for them to be implemented is another question entirely.

But out of all the red flags that I thought this idea raised in my mind, one of the most obvious was where people see it as a way of making free money, and while there is nothing like free money, it removes the idea of volunteering. The people who take the time to volunteer do so because they think that there is a need for change in society and rather than going about their day and cursing at the "government" for making their lives a mess, they pick up the spade and do something about it. But once you bring in the monetary aspect even people who donot wish to volunteer will become one, and because the aim of the volunteering was to get the movie coupon once the coupon is no longer available they will not wish to go back and volunteer once again. Also those who have been volunteering will be looked at by society as those who wanted to do it for the prize and not for their own conscience. Creating a reward based mechanism is not at all healthy because it does not induce people to do volunteering for the right purposes. Once it has been rewarded by money it automatically becomes employment, many people today slog to their jobs each day even when they donot like what they are doing just because they get the paycheck at the end of the month and this idea will turn volunteering into the same debacle

I guess what I am trying to say is that in my opinion volunteering is a very sacred job, its one that should be left to those who are intrinsicly motivated to do so, it should be left to those who really want to see a change in the world they live it, than to be left in the hands of those who wish to scrape off a 100 bucks from their Starbucks bill. It should be a job that is for people that feel the pain of those in need and wish to act upon it. I must also state that I understand that the idea was brought in as an act of good faith to make sure that those who spend time in volunteering and spend time in building a better society should also be adequetly rewarded but the long term effects of this seem to be damaging for soceity
